Hello and welcome back to the course in
R programming. Today we're going to
learn a couple of things. Today we're
going to learn about the if statement,
we're going to learn about the else
statement. The
else, if statement also we'll learn how to
nest those statements and chain them.
I know it sounds like quite a lot but
we're going to go through these things
to step by step and you'll see that it's
actually pretty simple stuff and we'll
get through it
no problem. Now what do I have up here?
Well I have a axis where I've put some
numbers just for our reference and that
is because right now we're going to
generate a random number is going to be
a random number from a normally
distributed set of numbers and it's okay
if you're not entirely comfortable with
the normal distribution and how it works
and things like that because we'll go
into depth on that in upcoming tutorials.
For now let's say we're just generating
a random number that is somewhere near
zero. It can be very close to 0 or it
could be quite far from zero but the
chances of it being closer are
higher than it being further away from 0.
And let's leave it at that and
let's get to the coding part so we can
learn about the if and else statement so
in order to generate the transit number
we're going to use the R norm function.
The R norm function generates a set of
numbers which are randomly distributed
according to the normal distribution and
inside the simple brackets as you can
see from this pop up over here you can
specify a three parameters. We're only going
to specify 1, we are just going to say one.
Place the number one in here because
that means that we want to generate
exactly one number. The other two
parameters specify what kind of normal
distribution once and here you can see
that the mean is 0, the sd
is one, so we leave those things out for
now because we already said that we want
a number somewhere near zero and that's
exactly what the default parameters will
give us. So once you've typed up this
code let's run it and see what it will give
us, so here you can see that we've got a
number that came out of nowhere
that is our random number. If we run this
code again you'll get a different number
as you can see it is quite close to zero
but it can be
further away if you keep trying
eventually you'll see different types of
numbers come up. Now we're going to store
the randomly generated number inside a
variable. Let's call this a variable X,
there we go so now when around this code
instead of the number popping up here,
it is now being stored inside the
variable X and the variable X inevitably
fall somewhere in this area. It can fall
further away, but that's very unlikely so
it usually falls somewhere here between
somewhere on minus 3,2,3 so it has a very
low high chance of falling in here. So
we're going to use the if statement to
identify where this variable will fall,
so let's start typing up our if
statement. The if statement has three parts
suit. It has the keyword if and it has standard
brackets and then it has curly brackets
and I'm sure you're getting quite used
to the structure because that's the same
structure that while loop has and four
loop has. The only difference between the
if statement and the while loop is that
it doesn't run many times. It only runs
once, so inside your normal brackets you
still specify a logical expression so in
this case we're going to check if x is
greater than one. So we want to see if
this variable that we're generating did
it fall in this area? Did fall to the
right of 1 or did fall to the left? So
basically want to check is this true
that X is on the right over here, so
that's a logical expression that we're
checking and then we're going to perform
some action inside here so let's say we
want to create a variable which is
answer and inside answer we want to
place the text which will tell us that
it is greater than one. So basically what
will happen is once we run this code
including the generation of the variable
is that the number will be generated it
will be put inside the variable then we
will run the if statement which will
check if the number is greater than one
and if it is greater than one then and
only then will the body of this if
statement be executed and then that's it
that's where the code will end, so it's
not like a while loop will continue
running it will just stop there.
So let's go ahead and run that. If we run
that you can see that the code has been
run
and the x value is updated here and
there is no answer variable so there's
no answer variable over here that is
because it hasn't being created. That's
because X is not greater than one and
this code was not executed. So let's run
this a couple more times, so there go the
next time we ran it you can see that X
is 1.6986 and the answer variable has been
generated it says greater than one. Now
if we run again, you'll see that what
happens is we run into a bit of a
problem. X is now less than 0 actually
but the answer is still saying greater than
one.
Why is that? Well this is simply because
the answer variable has been stored
since the previous run so because this
part of the code was not executed the
answer variable was not changed and
therefore it still has its old value, so
now we're going to learn how to remove
variables in R and that is also quite
a good skill to have. So here before we
run this code what we're going to do is
we're going to type in RM and then we're
going to type in the variable that we
want to remove answer, so if i run this
line by itself you'll see that the
answer variable has been removed.
So once again now if we highlight
everything what will happen is we're of
course we get a warning because we can't
remove a variable that doesn't exist but
that's okay.
What will happen is we remove the
variable if it exists and then we run
this code so let's try that again.
Let's try it again, a couple of times you
want to get X greater than one. So here
you can see that X is greater than one
and we've got the answer that it is
greater than one. So if we run the code
again from now, you will see that the
answer has disappeared and x is not
greater than one.
Ok so that is how the if statement works.
Now what happens if we want to something
else to happen if x is less than one? In
that case, we've got a useful statement
called the else statement. So if we type
in else over here and then we opened the
curly brackets and then inside these
curly brackets we need to type in the
body of the else statement. As you can
see, the else statement does not have
normal brackets here like the if
statement and that is because it doesn't
need a condition. The
else statement will happen in all other
cases except for when the if statement
happens. So it's like a default or a
fallback option if this part doesn't get
executed then this part will get
executed. So inside the else statement
what do we want to specify? Well in this
case we want to say that answer should
be equal to less than one right and so
let's give this a try. If we run all this
you'll see that here we've got answer
less than 1 because X is indeed less
than one. Here we've still got less than one,
now we've got greater than one. So as you
can see one or the other is only being
executed either this part or this part.
Ok so that allows us to understand where
the X falls in this area or whether X
falls in this area. In fact we need to
type in here less or equal to 1 because
it could be equal to 1.
Alright so that is how the if and else
statements work. Now we want to add in
the else if statement, so what if we want
to check three options? What if you want
to check if X is here? Then if X is here
or if X is here, right? So if you want to
check if it's greater than one between
minus 1 and 1 or if it's less than minus
1.
How do we do that? Well what we could do
is we could take out this bit and here
in this else statement, so first we could
check if x is greater than one, this part.
Then if X is not greater than one so
basically X falls between minus infinity
and one then we will run an additional
if-else statement so let's have a look
at that. We're going to type in if x is
less than one we already know that x is
less than on if we want to say if x is
greater or equal to minus 1 then we will
say that answer is between minus 1 and 1
right? Because we already know that it's
not greater than 1 because this was not
executed so definitely is somewhere here
so if this condition is true that means
we're definitely lying in this area
between minus 1 and 1 and then to this
we could add another else statement
saying
hey if this is not correct so if this
was not correct and now if this is not
correct then X has no other option but
to be here. Be a less than minus 1, so in
that case we'll say answer less than
minus 1 and so that is a valid way, a
valid approach to solving this problem.
So I'm going to highlight all of this
and click tab to move it to the right
you can click shift tab to move it to left but I'm
just going to move it to the right so it
actually stands up. So if I run this this
whole code now which is actually growing
pretty quickly right? So if I run this
whole code you will see that every time
it will give you the correct answer
because that's how these if-else
statements work. By the way, this
structure is called a nested if else
statement. We've got one if else statement and
then we've got an another if-else
statement within that first one. That's
why it's called nested so now if I keep
running it you'll see that it will give
you the correct answer every time
because that's how we've prepared it
right? Now the last thing that I wanted
to show you in this tutorial is that
this structure can get very cumbersome
right? If you want to add another pair of
nested statement, it will start growing
and growing growing and that's why it's
nested statements are not of the best
practice in programming. It's much better
to chain statements,
let's see how that works. Chaining
statement is pretty simple in R as in
many or most other programming languages
you can also specify a third type of
these statements. There's if, there's else,
there's actually else if and else if is
exactly what allows you to chain that.
Let's have a look at it,
so here instead of this else, what I would
type in I would type in else if actually
separated so I would type in else if and
then I would take this part so get rid
of that and I would take this and put it
in here right?
So there you go, so you have that if then
you have the else if and then you would
put in the last else after that else if,
and then you get rid of this bracket
because you don't need it anymore. So
this structure is a bit different and
what happens here is first you check
out this
if statement, so is X greater than one?
Then you check else if so if that's not
correct let's check the next statement,
is X greater than minus 1? Greater or
equal to, so does X falls? Does x falls
between these two and if that's not
correct then you go to the fallback
option
meaning that X has no other option but
to lie over here below minus one. So you
achieve the same result but as you can
see the code is much near and much
shorter and this is called chaining
statement. So let's go ahead and run this
now, as you can see on the right here you
were still getting the correct result
every time.
That's because we're achieving the same
result but we are doing it so in a much
better way.
So there we go, that's how if-else and
else if statements work and that's the
difference between nesting and chaining
and it's good to know the difference
because sometimes people get it wrong
they think that chaining is actually
called nesting well those are two
different things and this brings us to
the end of today's tutorial. I hope you
found it useful and I look forward to
seeing you next time.
Until then, happy coding.